---
layout : post
title : Data Privacy
---

It’s a crazy world we live in; we’ve sent men to the moon, transplanted hearts, and built robots that can beat the best humans at chess. Technology and science have done great things for humanity since the Neaderthals, or even the 19th Century. Yet while many of us enjoy electricity and plumbing, television and internet, Seamless and Amazon, not all of us do. By any means. Despite making enough food to feed the world, millions suffer from malnutrition. Despite vacant houses across the nation, millions are homeless. Aside from inventing refrigerators and penicilin, humans have also built machine guns and nuclear bombs. Simply put, not all technology is for good.

So what does data privacy have to do with all of this? Many say, ‘I have nothing to hide’ or ‘who cares, stop worrying’. After all it seems fairly innocuous, albeit creepy at times, but what harm could that ad for the clothes you were looking at yesterday be? As many companies are claiming, they’re just delivering you customized and more personalized content; wouldn’t you rather see an ad for something you’re interested in rather then something you’re not, eh? Doesn’t seem too bad; some of those ads might be annoying but all these services; Youtube, Facebook, your favorite news site, are free. What starts to get scarier is when we all start to realize the power that such datasets have at scale. Has the new Cambridge Analytica scare with Facebook gotten you scared? It’s purported that 87 million Facebook’s users data was stolen, and the data was specifically used to influence the 2016 Presidential election.

Let’s think a bit more about how you could use this data to influence an election. Imagine having a much much more detailed view of the U.S. population; not broad census statistics, but a person by person profile—some big brother type shit. Now let’s map those people to various geograpies such as states and electoral colleges. Let’s also label everyone with their likelihood to vote; did they vote in the previous election? How much are they talking about the election on social media? How much do they read the news? How politically involved are their friends and family on Facebook? How far do they live from the polling site? How crowded will that polling site be? How long will voters have to wait in line? Do they have to work that day? Do they have a car or transportation to get there? Are they a die hard liberal, staunch conservative, or ‘up for grabs’? Ok, now let’s build some AI to hash out these questions and focus our attention on those voters who we think we can influence and pull to our side. Maybe your data was stolen and you were labelled as ‘unimportant’ or ‘unifluenceable’ (at least to vote for Trump...those retargeting clothes ads from before labelled you as influenceable). Even so, if your data was stolen it was still helpful in differentiating you from the other sheep who were herded the other way. To me this begins to outline a much more critical reason why data privacy should be a concern to all. It’s not about one vote. It’s not about your vote. It’s about having conversations and standing up together to make a better society and better future for us all. It’s not about your privacy. It’s about our privacy. It’s about ensuring that elections aren’t so easily bought and sold. It’s about preserving our autonomy and collective choice.  Gerrymandering, Jim Crow and other forms of voter suppression have long divided and stunted democracy. Now big data is ushering in a new era of big brother. Many of us feel like we are above this and make our own choices. ‘Those ads didn’t influence me.’ We act as if we are immune to advertising,  and again view it as simply an annoying fly; if we don’t pay attention to it, its not a problem. Let’s ask a different, less personal question. Do you really think that ads are ineffective? That million and billion dollar companies pour money into the advertising industry to no avail? How many company jingles and slogans do you know? Even aside from ads, companies can ask questions like, ‘what are people spending their time doing?’ What are they reading about? My own company has asked me to measure how many people have read articles about an ongoing debaucle in the news. Their goal: measure its spread, try and contain the story. We have got to accept that while its hard to put your finger on exactly how its influencing you, when looked at from an aerial view the picture is clear: advertising, media and data have real effects on society.

Let’s unveil a couple more layers of this data privacy fiasco that is going on. Are Facebook and Google tracking your every move via your phone? How often do you have a thought, a question and you immediately Google it? Does Google essentially know what we are all collectively thinking, at a much more granular scale then what is published on Google Trends? Did you know all android phones now have the mic passively on at all times? Or how about that your cell phone and internet provider can track and record every online behavior you engage it, not for the FBI or security reasons, but simply to build consumer profiles of you and everyone else and sell them to the highest bidder. Does all of this strike you as a problem? Take a look at companies like Axciom, Applecart and Jumpshot. Even these smaller players are harvesting and selling user data en mass. The story should be clear: whoever can afford this data can mine it and continue to engineer new ways to redirect the herd.

So what can we do? How are we ever supposed to get out of this mess? Lets start with some basics. Try and stop using google for everything. Try and alternative like duckduckgo.com that is not such a huge monopoly. Subscribe to a VPN. Yes, it does cost $3-$8 a month. But how many other subscriptions are you currently harboring to Netflix, Spotify, or what have you? Remove Facebook and other apps from your phone. Learn about how cookies and javascript can be used to track you. Talk with your friends and family about the consequences of poor data privacy laws. Try using TOR. Stop and think about these things. Look around you and question. What media are you consuming? Do you like the culture it represents? Are you playing the role you want to play? Being the person you want to be? The internet has often been touted as liberating, providing free access to information and communication. Yet if the vast vast majority of our internet use is funneled through a handful of publishers and tech giants, and all of this activity is monitored and recorded on a massive scale, what have we really gained? There are alternatives, and while it might seem difficult at first, having our own dialogues, journalism and media certainly sounds like a future to believe in.
